SDSS 98-3
December 8, 1998
News release and high-resolution photos available at
http://www.sdss.org/news/releases/19981208.qso.html

For immediate release


SCIENTISTS OF SLOAN DIGITAL SKY SURVEY DISCOVER MOST DISTANT QUASAR

Batavia, Ill. -- Scientists of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey have
announced the discovery of the most distant quasar ever observed. At a
December 4 collaboration meeting at the Department of Energy's Fermi
National Accelerator Laboratory near Chicago, Princeton University
graduate student Xiaohui Fan broke the news. Using data from only the
first months of the initial shakedown operation of new sky-mapping
technology, Fan said, the Sky Survey had already discovered three of the
four most distant quasars currently known.

"We could identify these quasars so readily," Fan said, "because of
the Sky Survey's unique characteristics: its superb telescope and
camera, the power of the analysis software, and the large amount of sky
it can cover."

Sky Survey astronomer Michael Strauss of Princeton University, Fan's
faculty advisor, described the discovery of the most distant of all
quasars -- compact yet luminous objects thought to be powered by
super-massive black holes.

"Xiaohui and I were in the basement of Peyton Hall at Princeton,
operating the 3.5-meter diameter telescope at Apache Point Observatory
over the Internet to follow up on quasar candidates from the Sky Survey
data. It was 1:30 a.m. on Thanksgiving morning, and we only had about
half an hour of observing time left.  Xiaohui suggested observing one of
our last promising high-redshift quasar candidates before we finished
up. As soon as we saw the spectrum, we knew we had a record-breaking
quasar."

Secretary of Energy Bill Richardson congratulated the Sky Survey
astronomers on their discovery.

"You are extending the frontiers of human understanding into new and
uncharted territory," Secretary Richardson said. "I am proud that the
Department of Energy supports science that spans the entire panorama of
our universe, from the inner recesses of the proton to the outermost
reaches of space."

Remarkably, the Sky Survey telescope at Apache Point Observatory in
southern New Mexico unveiled the three quasars during an early stage of
its commissioning, after examining just a narrow slice of the sky -- the
first one percent of its planned sky coverage. Only a portion of that
data has so far been analyzed. Members of the team were still
calibrating instruments, building data archives, and installing a new
monitor telescope when the discovery data were taken in September, just
months after first light.

"The National Science Foundation is gratified to see the promise of
the Sloan Digital Sky Survey being realized, even in these early
results," said Hugh Van Horn, director of NSF's Division of Astronomical
Sciences.  "We are eager to see the resulting data archive become
publicly available to all qualified U.S. astronomers, and we are working
with the project to help expedite this release."

More than 80 scientists meeting at Fermilab, near Chicago received
the news enthusiastically, cheering a series of color images and
spectral plots that revealed the new record-holders, quasars with
redshifts of 5.0, 4.9, and 4.75. Redshift is the amount by which light
is shifted toward the red end of an object's spectrum by the expansion
of the universe. Astronomers use redshift as a measure of the distance
of celestial objects: the higher the redshift, the greater the distance
and the younger the universe when the light was emitted.  The newly
discovered quasars mark an epoch when the universe was less than a
billion years old and a sixth of its current size.

The most distant quasar now surpasses a quasar discovered in 1991 at
a redshift of 4.89 by astronomers Donald Schneider, Maarten Schmidt and
James Gunn. Two of the three, Gunn and Schneider, were at the Fermilab
meeting Friday morning, applauding with their colleagues at the
announcement of the news.

"The results are revolutionary," Schneider, a Sky Survey
collaborating astronomer from Pennsylvania State University, said
afterward. "What we have found is not totally unexpected but it is
extraordinary at this early stage. Looking at only one percent of the
data and using prototype software and only a preliminary calibration to
evaluate it, we have achieved an 70 percent success rate in identifying
bright high-redshift quasars. At the current rate of discovery, by the
end of the Survey we should find more than 500 quasars with redshift
greater than 4.75."

Many said long-held expectations were already being confirmed that
the project will readily generate masses of detailed data that will not
only chart the skies, but also present a magnificent panorama of the
large-scale structure of the universe. Imaging the slender slice of sky,
the Sky Survey's new wide-field telescope electronically recorded
millions of objects during its trial runs. The images depicted a broad
range of objects -- from nearby asteroids between Mars and Jupiter to
mysterious hybrid galaxies -- and left scientists with an astonishing
array of data to analyze.

For weeks, Fan and Fermilab scientists Heidi Newberg and Brian Yanny
sifted through the huge database, relying on the Sky Survey's new
filtering techniques to select a few dozen objects they suspected might
be high-redshift quasars.  Fan and Strauss then used a separate
3.5-meter telescope at Apache Point Observatory to verify that they had
detected 12 new quasars at redshifts above 3.6. This represented an
extraordinary success rate for the infant project, barely beyond its
preliminary stages of testing.

"We had planned all along for this discovery.  Nevertheless, we were
really excited when we actually found high-redshift quasars," said Alex
Szalay, professor of astrophysics at The Johns Hopkins University and a
member of the team for almost a decade. "The real challenge for us now
will be recognizing objects whose existence we are not even aware of.
We'll need to develop new software tools to mine the data."

Alan Bunner, science program director for the Structure and Evolution of
the Universe for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
added that "NASA is pleased to be a part of this pioneering project that
will greatly enhance both ground- and space-based astronomy for the next
50 years."

The ultimate goal of the Sky Survey, an international collaboration
of more than 100 scientists and engineers, is to map one quarter of the
sky and create a systematic, three-dimensional picture of the universe
100 times larger than in previous surveys. The Survey team will first
create a digital image of the sky in five colors, using the most complex
astronomical camera ever built, mounted on a 2.5-meter telescope built
for the survey. From the digital images, astronomers will choose the
million brightest galaxies and use a specially designed spectrograph to
measure the redshifts of the million brightest galaxies, 600 at a time.
The redshifts will allow scientists to determine the distances to these
million galaxies -- adding the third dimension. The Survey will also
find redshifts for 100,000 quasars.

"Quasars are a major target of the Sky Survey," said Sadanori
Okamura, a University of Tokyo astronomer. "With the luminosity of more
than 100 galaxies emitted from a volume no larger than our solar system,
quasars continue to mystify astronomers. Quasars may well play a
significant role in the evolution of structures in the universe."

Astronomers don't actually know how quasars fit into the scheme of
things, said astronomer Richard Kron of the University of Chicago and
Fermilab.

"We have reason to believe," Kron said, "that they are powered by
massive black holes whose energy comes from intensely hot material
that's rapidly funneling into the hole. But we don't understand where
the holes came from."

University of Washington astronomer Craig Hogan underscored the
significance of quasars.

"As the most powerful beacons in the sky," said Hogan, "rare, bright
quasars give astronomers an excellent way to examine intervening
material that absorbs their light. Ironically, the brightest things in
the universe provide probes for even the emptiest parts of intergalactic
space."

From the beginning, scientists had planned to use the neighboring
3.5-meter telescope at Apache Point Observatory to investigate
interesting objects culled from the huge lists generated each night by
the smaller Sky Survey telescope.

"The ability to follow up quickly on quasar candidates with the
3.5-meter telescope has made this discovery possible," said University
of Chicago astronomer Don York, first director of the Sky Survey and of
the Apache Point Observatory.  "It has proven the vision that many of us
had for the synergy between the two telescopes."

Data from Sky Survey commissioning runs in June and September were
processed through data analysis "pipelines" at Fermilab.

"The software pipelines automatically detect celestial objects," said
Princeton scientist Robert Lupton.  "For each one, they measure the
intensity of five colors of light passing through the camera.
Astronomers can then separate stars from quasars by their distinctive
colors."

At Friday's meeting in Chicago, standing before a distinguished
gathering of senior astronomers, Fan presented the data with a sense of
their momentous foreshadowing.

"There is every reason to believe," the Princeton student said, "that in
years to come there will be even more exciting results from this survey.
We have found the most distant quasars quite easily, after people have
been searching for them for decades. We can look forward to many years
of good science."

Participating institutions in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey include
The University of Chicago, Fermilab, the Institute for Advanced Study,
the Japanese Participation Group, The Johns Hopkins University,
Princeton University, the United States Naval Observatory and the
University of Washington. Apache Point Observatory, site of the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey, is owned by the Astrophysical Research Consortium, a
nonprofit corporation consisting of seven research institutions, and is
operated by New Mexico State University. Funding to date for the project
has been provided by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, Sky Survey member
institutions, the National Science Foundation, the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration and the U.S. Department of Energy.


Media Contacts:

Steve Koppes, The University of Chicago, 
773-702-8366, s-koppes@uchicago.edu

Judy Jackson, Fermilab, 
630-840-4112, jjackson@fnal.gov

Georgia Whidden, The Institute for Advanced Study, 
609-734-8239, gwhidden@ias.edu

Satoru Ikeuchi, Japanese Participation Group, 
81-52-789-2427, ikeuchi@a.phys.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Gary Dorsey, The Johns Hopkins University, 
410-516-7906, gdd@jhu.edu

Steven Dick, U.S. Naval Observatory, 
202-762-1438, dick@ariel.usno.navy.mil

Mary Caffrey, Princeton University, 
609-258-5748, caffrey@princeton.edu

Vince Stricherz, University of Washington, 
206-543-2580, vinces@u.washington,edu

Bruce Gillespie, Apache Point Observatory, 
505-437-6822, gillespie@galileo.apo.nmsu.edu

News release and high-resolution photos available at
http://www.sdss.org/news/releases/19981208.qso.html 
