Media Contacts
Kathy Anderson, University of Chicago 773-702-8364
Judy Jackson, Fermilab 630-840-3351
Rachel Gray, The Institute for Advanced Study 609-734-8201
Satoru Ikeuchi, Japan Participation Group 81-52-789-2427
Emil Venere, The Johns Hopkins University 410-516-7906
Steven Dick, U.S. Naval Observatory 202-762-1438
Mary Caffrey, Princeton University 609-258-5729
Vince Stricherz, University of Washington 206-543-2580
Bruce Gillespie, Apache Point Observatory 505-437-6822
Website: www.sdss.org (First light images available 9:00 a.m. PDT 6/9/98)


Embargoed for release after 9:00 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time on Monday,
June 8, 1998


HISTORIC NEW SKY SURVEY ACHIEVES FIRST LIGHT

San Diego -- Scientists of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, the most
ambitious sky-mapping project ever undertaken, announced today (June 8)
that the project's unique telescope, located at Apache Point Observatory
in southern New Mexico, has achieved first light. In a presentation at
the San Diego meeting of the American Astronomical Society, Constance
Rockosi, a University of Chicago graduate student and member of the Sky
Survey collaboration, discussed the team's achievement.

"With first light, we have demonstrated that we have the tools in place
to make a deep, high-resolution, multicolor, digital map of the sky,"
Rockosi said. "It is an exciting and important milestone in our project
to chart the large-scale structure of the universe."

Years of work by project collaborators, along with recent
round-the-clock efforts by a team of scientists and engineers on the
mountaintop, culminated in first light on the night of May 9 and the
first high-quality images of a large swath of sky in the constellations
Serpens and Ophiuchus on the night of May 27.

"When I saw the starry images appear on the monitor, it was suddenly
worth the 18 trips I have taken across the Pacific," said astronomer
Mamoru Doi, of the University of Tokyo, whose work on the project
includes contributions to the system that renders the starry images in
brilliant color. Chicago's Rockosi echoed his excitement at seeing the
first images scrolling across a bank of computer monitors.

"It was incredible to see such a large piece of the sky presented in
such depth and fine detail -- really a beautiful sight," she said.

Several elements of forefront astronomical technology came together in
the new telescope to yield the first celestial images. Chicago's Rockosi
is part of a team, headed by Princeton University astronomer Jim Gunn,
the Survey's project scientist, that designed, built and installed the
telescope's digital camera, the most complex imaging instrument ever
developed for astronomy. It uses a large array of silicon charge-coupled
devices to create five-color digital images of the sky.

"The camera has come together in concept and in metal, glass, and
silicon over the past many years," Gunn said, "and has, of course, been
thoroughly tested in the laboratory. So we did not really doubt that it
would work on the sky. But the thrill of seeing real images and knowing
that the Survey was truly going to work after so many years of the sweat
and tears of so many people was quite incredible."

The telescope will also incorporate two spectrographs, built by
scientists at The Johns Hopkins University. The spectrographs provide
information about the chemical composition of the astronomical sources
and information about their distances, to pinpoint their positions in
three-dimensional space.

"The spectrographs are our 3-D glasses," said Johns Hopkins
astrophysicist Alan Uomoto, who led the spectrograph team. "They make
the Sky Survey far more than just cosmic cartography. The information
provided by the spectrographs is vital if we hope to understand the
origin and evolution of the universe and its constituents."

The new telescope has an unusually wide field of view, enabling it to
map large areas of sky in a practical length of time.  It features very
accurate tracking, necessary for precision measurements of star
positions.

"The telescope, though small, was particularly challenging, because it
has to produce good images across a wide field," said Walter Siegmund,
of the University of Washington, the Survey's project engineer.

After several months of commissioning, Survey operations will begin. The
collaboration's astronomers will use the images and spectra to construct
the most comprehensive three-dimensional model of the cosmos ever
attempted. Five years of data-taking by the Survey will produce a
catalog of the positions and brightnesses of more than 100 million
stars, galaxies and quasars, according to University of Washington
astrophysicist Bruce Margon, the Sky Survey's scientific director.

"The Sloan Digital Sky Survey will be significantly more sensitive than
our current comprehensive guide to the heavens, the forty-year-old
Palomar Sky Survey," Margon said. "The Palomar survey used photographic
plates to produce two-color, two-dimensional images. Our survey will use
digital technology and spectroscopy to produce five-color images in
three dimensions. It will map one quarter of the sky and give us a
three-dimensional picture of the universe through a volume a hundred
times greater than anyone has explored before."

Scientists will use the new map to explore critical questions about the
nature and evolution of the universe.

"The Sky Survey will greatly advance our knowledge of the universe --
past, present and future," said University of Chicago/Fermilab
astrophysicist Michael Turner, the project's scientific spokesman. "We
are struggling to understand how the wondrous panoply of structure we
see in the universe today -- galaxies, clusters of galaxies, voids and
great walls of galaxies -- arose. Our best explanations involve what
happened in the first instants after the Big Bang and relate to the
unification of the fundamental forces of nature.  So the Sky Survey may
give us not only a clearer picture of outer space but also of the inner
space at the heart of matter."

Ultimately, the Sky Survey will make its historic celestial catalog
available to astronomers around the world, for a wide range of future
studies. The catalog's unprecedented volume of data creates challenges
for the scientists who will use it.

"The techniques that astronomers use today do not scale to this survey,
whose information content will rival the Library of Congress," said
Johns Hopkins astronomer Alex Szalay, who is designing data-analysis
systems for the project. "The Sky Survey requires a novel computing and
analysis environment. In fact, the Sky Survey approach is creating new
standards in data analysis for astronomy that may well apply to other
fields, such as the study of the human genome, that require
extraordinarily large data sets."

Data from the mountaintop will be transferred daily to computer systems
at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory near Chicago. Software systems
called data pipelines will translate the raw data into images of the
sky.

"Creating the data-processing software has been a major effort of the
project," said astronomer Jeff Pier, of the U.S. Naval Observatory.
"Scientists across the collaboration developed the pipelines, which are
then integrated at Fermilab."

Eventually, the Sky Survey's data will be available to the public over
the Internet. Professional and amateur astronomers, teachers and budding
school-age astronomers anywhere in the world will be able to dial up an
image of a selected piece of the sky in five colors. When the Next
Generation Internet arrives, they will be able to conduct complex
searches of the Sky Survey archives.

The Sky Survey collaboration includes scientists from the University of
Chicago, Fermilab, the Institute for Advanced Study, the Japan
Participation Group, The Johns Hopkins University, Princeton University,
the United States Naval Observatory and the University of Washington.
Apache Point Observatory, site of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, is owned
by the Astrophysical Research Consortium, a nonprofit corporation
consisting of seven research institutions, and is operated by New Mexico
State University. Funding to date for the project has been provided by
the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, Sky Survey member institutions, the
National Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of Energy. In
addition to its support for the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, NSF provides
more than $110 million annually for ground-based astronomy and
astrophysics. Support from DOE, a longtime stronghold of high-energy
physics research, reflects the increasing convergence of particle
physics and cosmology.
