SDSS 00-01
April 13, 2000
For immediate release

Sloan Digital Sky Survey Finds Most Distant Object Ever Observed

Chicago, Ill. -- The distinctive palette of colors in its light told
scientists that the bright red object they were studying wasn't just
another star.  Indeed, last week, when astronomers analyzed the spectrum
from the quasar they had found, they realized they were seeing light
that had left its source at time when the universe was a baby, a mere
infant of less than a billion years old.

They were looking at the most distant object human beings had ever
identified.

This farthest of the quasars -- compact yet luminous objects thought to
be powered by black holes as massive as a billion suns -- turned up in
data taken in March, 2000, by astronomers of the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey, said the Survey's spokesman, Dr. Michael S. Turner of the
University of Chicago and the Department of Energy's Fermilab.

"The newly discovered quasar has a red shift of 5.8," Turner
said. "Redshift is the amount by which light from a distant object is
shifted toward the red end of the spectrum by the expansion of the
universe. Astronomers use redshift as a measure of the distance of
celestial objects: the higher the redshift, the greater the distance and
the younger the universe when the light was emitted."

The new quasar breaks the distance record previously held by a galaxy
with redshift 5.7, discovered last year by Esther Hu and colleagues at
the University of Hawaii and the Institute of Astronomy in Cambridge,
UK.  Moreover, -- and ultimately perhaps much more significant -- this
isn't the first far-off quasar the Sky Survey has found.

"Finding record-breaking quasars has become something of a habit for the
Sky Survey," said SDSS astronomer Professor Michael Strauss, of
Princeton University. "Twice before, SDSS scientists have found quasars
more distant than any found before. To date, SDSS has discovered some
thousand quasars, including eight of the ten most distant known quasars
and two-thirds of the quasars with redshifts greater than 4.5 -- a
quasar harvest that is the more remarkable because it comes from data
gleaned from the early engineering phase of the Sky Survey."

Just a few weeks ago, two SDSS astronomers, Johns Hopkins University
research scientist Wei Zheng and JHU Associate Research Professor Zlatan
Tsvetanov, discovered what is now the second most distant SDSS quasar,
with a redshift of 5.3. Zheng and Tsvetanov were among the first to
congratulate the team that broke their record.

According to SDSS astronomer Professor Richard Kron of the University of
Chicago and Fermilab, the SDSS quasar advantage comes from the size of
the survey, and its unique ability to look at objects across five
precisely measured color bands.

"Distant quasars, which are extremely rare in the universe, take on the
appearance of very red stars," Kron explained. "Since the Sky Survey
digitizes images of 20,000 objects in every square degree of sky, the
accurate color information and the Sky Survey's recipe for quasar
selection are critical to distinguish very distant quasars from
everything else."

When SDSS astronomer and Princeton graduate student Xiaohui Fan spotted
the new quasar in the Sky Survey data he was studying based on
observations made in March 2000, its distinctively red color showed it
to be a likely candidate for a very distant quasar. Fan, University of
California at Berkeley Professor Marc Davis, UC Davis Professor Robert
Becker, and astronomer Richard L. White of the Space Telescope Science
Institute, used the 10-meter Keck telescope in Hawaii to measure the
quasar's spectrum and confirm that it is indeed the most distant object
ever found. While there are number of intriguing candidate objects for
redshifts higher than 6, their spectra have not yet been taken.

"Without a confirming spectrum," said Berkeley's Davis, "the discovery
of a high-redshift object doesn't really count."

While setting distance records is exhilarating, Sky Survey astronomers
said, the meaning of such discoveries goes far beyond the distance
scorecard. The great power of the SDSS is to find so many of these
candidates, with its wide field-of-view, and to do so with such a high
probability of success.

"The real significance of the Sloan quasars," said SDSS Project
Scientist James Gunn of Princeton University, "is not their
record-breaking distances but the size and quality of the sample. The
scale and the homogeneity of the data will allow SDSS and other
scientists to use quasars to chart the birth and formation of galaxies,
explore structure on the largest scales, and better understand black
holes. Past quasar surveys have included a smaller and less uniform
selection of objects. When the Sky Survey is complete, it will have
combed one quarter of the sky, using uniform selection criteria."

Sky Survey astronomer Donald Schneider, a Pennsylvania State University
professor, noted that our current understanding of very high redshift
quasars is based on samples of a dozen or so objects assembled over many
years of observation.

"In the past eighteen months," Schneider said, "SDSS has more than
doubled the number of known quasars with redshifts above 4.5."

Already, said Princeton's Fan, he and others have used the early Sloan
sample to trace the time history of quasar populations. Consistent with
earlier studies, the SDSS data show that the number of quasars rose
dramatically from a billion years after the big bang to a peak around
2.5 billion years later, falling off sharply at lower redshift and hence
later times.

Indeed, said SDSS astronomer and Princeton researcher Robert Lupton, the
new quasar is sure to attract more than its share of attention from
astronomy groups at the biggest telescopes in the world.

"Because it is so exceptionally luminous, it provides a wonderful
opportunity to study the universe when the galaxies that we see today
were young," Lupton said, "or perhaps before they had even been born."

University of Chicago Professor Donald York, one of the Sky Survey
initiators and a well-known quasar maven himself, went a step further.

"You haven't seen anything yet," York said. "By the time the Sloan
Survey is done, it will rewrite the book on quasars and the early
evolution of galaxies, as well as on many other topics in astronomy."

The Sloan project will ultimately survey 10,000 square degrees, or one
quarter of the sky, and 200 million celestial objects. Of these, a
million or so will be quasars, and the Sky Survey's 2.5-meter
special-purpose telescope will determine distances for some 100,000 of
the brightest.  Telescopes around the world (including the 3.5-meter ARC
telescope, near the Sky Survey telescope at Apache Point, N.M. site, and
the 9.2 meter Hobby-Eberly telescope at McDonald Observatory in Texas)
will follow up on these new quasars.

The Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) is a joint project of The University
of Chicago, Fermilab, the Institute for Advanced Study, the Japan
Participation Group, The Johns Hopkins University, the
Max-Planck-Institute for Astronomy, Princeton University, the United
States Naval Observatory, and the University of Washington. Apache Point
Observatory, site of the SDSS, is operated by the Astrophysical Research
Consortium. Funding for the project has been provided by the Alfred
P. Sloan Foundation, the SDSS member institutions, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, the National Science Foundation,
the U.S. Department of Energy, and Monbusho. The SDSS Web site is
http://www.sdss.org/. The Keck 10-meter telescope, the world's largest,
is jointly operated by the University of California, Caltech, the
University of Hawaii and NASA.

Note to editors: High-resolution images of the SDSS telescope in Apache
Point, the quasar, the quasar's spectrum, and the distribution of
high-redshift quasars over time are available on the Web at www.sdss.org.
