SDSS 01-01                                        
For release after 9:15 a.m. PDT, June 5, 2001
High-resolution images at http://www.sdss.org/

Early results from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey: From under our nose to
the edge of the universe

Pasadena, Calif. -- Scientists of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey today
(June 5) presented results based on early data from the project. The
first glimpses of what will ultimately be the most comprehensive and
fully digital map of the sky included identification of the two most
distant objects ever observed; new light on asteroids; and the first
SDSS results on the large-scale distribution of galaxies.

Sky Survey collaborators also announced the release to the worldwide
astronomy community of the first large piece of the digital sky.

Quasar Record-Breakers

Dr. Donald Schneider of the Pennsylvania State University described the
observation of two quasars with respective redshifts of 6.0 and 6.2, the
most distant objects ever observed in the universe. The two new quasars
break the previous distance record established by last year's SDSS
discovery of a quasar at redshift 5.8. The data presented today also
reveal still another quasar of redshift 5.8. The redshift of an object
directly indicates the relative size of the universe when the light was
emitted: light from a redshift 6.2 quasar left that object when the
universe was 7.2 times smaller than it is today.

"Quasars are precocious galaxies whose massive black holes began
accreting matter, lighting them up when the universe was less than 800
million years old," said Dr. Xiaohui Fan of the Institute for
Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, who led the team that
identified the quasars. "They allow us to study the birth of
galaxies, and the first supermassive black holes."

The SDSS's goal is the observation of 100,000 quasars. To date,
collaborators have discovered over 13,000, including the four most
distant objects yet seen, and 26 of the 30 most distant quasars. The
intervening material between us and a distant quasar absorbs some of the
quasar light and leaves its imprint in the quasar's spectrum that is
observed by the SDSS, explained Dr. Donald York of the University of
Chicago, the Sky Survey's founding director.

"In much the same way an x-ray reveals the inside of the human body,"
York said, "this spectrum reveals a line of sight across the universe,
sometimes passing through hundreds of galaxies.  With the SDSS spectrum
of a single quasar we can study hundreds of distant galaxies, some of
which are just forming." 

The key to SDSS's success in quasar spotting is precision digital data
in five colors, allowing astronomers to distinguish quasars from more
common faint stars, explained Dr. Wei Zheng of the Johns Hopkins
University, who helped develop the color-tagging technique. 

SDSS scientists follow up identified high-redshift quasar candidates on
larger telescopes to confirm their spectra. Astronomers took the spectra
of the two record-breakers with the Astrophysical Research Consortium's
3.5 m telescope, located at the Apache Point Observatory in New Mexico,
also the site of the SDSS telescope. 

"The discovery demonstrates the power of the 2.5 m special-purpose SDSS
telescope working in tandem with the larger 3.5 m general-purpose
telescope," York said. "It is exciting to see this partnership work just
the way we dreamed it would." 

Asteroids

The SDSS collaborators presented the first clear evidence for chemical
segregation in the belt of asteroids between Mars and Jupiter.

By viewing the asteroids in five color bands, explained Dr. Tom Quinn of
the University of Washington, the SDSS survey can reliably separate
individual asteroids into two main classes, rocky silicate asteroids and
more primitive carbonaceous asteroids.

"The SDSS observations also showed that the two types of asteroids are
spatially separated," Quinn said, "with the inner belt of rocky
asteroids centered at about 2.8 AU from the sun and the outer belt of
carbonaceous asteroids centered at about 3.2 AU. This distribution has
important implications for unraveling how the solar system formed and
suggests that planet migrations that seem to be common in other
planetary systems have not occurred in ours."

One astronomical unit, or AU, corresponds to the distance from the sun
to the earth.

The SDSS asteroid sample also turned up another surprise.

"There appear to be fewer asteroids smaller than about 4 km in diameter
in the asteroid belt than we previously thought,"  said Dr. Zeljko
Ivezic of Princeton University, the leader of the SDSS asteroid
team. "Since the asteroid belt is believed to be the reservoir for
Earth-crossing asteroids, the new SDSS observations suggest that future
asteroid collisions with Earth may be less likely than previously
believed."
 
The SDSS scanning technique allows only five minutes to follow celestial
objects as they move across the field of view, said Dr. Robert Lupton of
Princeton University.  During this time asteroids appear to move a
distance just 1/1000th the size of the moon, relative to the distant
stars.

"Nevertheless," Lupton said, "we can reliably detect their tiny motions
and even determine their orbital motions around the sun."

The asteroid observations rely on precision position-finding software
developed by SDSS collaborators at the US Naval Observatory.

Large-Scale Galaxy Distribution

The early SDSS results for distribution of matter in the universe
reinforce the current model of a low-density universe whose expansion is
accelerating, announced Dr. Alex Szalay of the Johns Hopkins University.

"Our results fit with the distribution of matter inferred from
measurements of the cosmic microwave background radiation," Szalay said.

Dr. Josh Frieman of the University of Chicago and Fermi National
Accelerator Laboratory said that SDSS observations together with recent
measurements of the cosmic microwave background radiation have now
pinned down the distribution of matter from the relatively small scale
of galaxies all the way to the limits of the observable universe.

"Our observations are consistent with the idea that our universe
underwent a burst of enormous expansion when it was a fraction of a
second old," Frieman said. 

The SDSS sample has also begun to answer longstanding questions about
the origins of galaxy types, the so-called "nature vs. nurture" debate.

"Our data show that different kinds of galaxies cluster differently,
indicating that galaxies are influenced by their environment," said
Professor David Weinberg of the Ohio State University.

The quality of the SDSS digital data supersedes that of previous
surveys, which enables collaborators to make precise measurements of
large-scale structure even though they are using only a few percent of
the ultimate Survey data, explained Ryan Scranton, a graduate student at
the University of Chicago who played a key role in the analysis.

Large-Scale Data Distribution

In a major milestone for astronomy, SDSS collaborators announced the
release to the worldwide astronomy community of the Survey's early
data. The release includes 500 square degrees of the sky, 500 Gigabytes
of images, precision measurements of some 14 million objects, and
spectra of 50,000 galaxies and 5,000 quasars. Ultimately, the SDSS plans
to release to astronomers and the public all the data from the five-year
Survey. This enormous data release--the biggest ever in astronomy--will
reside in archives at both Fermilab and the Space Telescope Science
Institute in Baltimore, MD.

"I expect that the discoveries by astronomers outside the SDSS
collaboration, using the data archive, will ultimately dwarf those
produced by the collaboration itself," said Dr. Marc Postman, of the
Space Telescope Science Institute, who helped develop the archive
interface.  

Dr. Chris Stoughton of Fermilab explained that the software that
produced the data involved more than a million lines of code written by
the SDSS scientists.

"This early data release represents the work of dozens of astronomers,
computer scientists and programmers working over the last decade,"
Stoughton said.

The key to accessing the data is the SkyServer, an interactive interface
developed with the help of Dr. Jim Gray of Microsoft's Bay Area Research
Center, said Hopkins' Szalay.

"With the SkyServer and the early Sloan data, any astronomer can
navigate the universe and access data for over 10 million objects," 
Szalay said.

A version of the SkyServer designed for students and the general public
is currently in development.

While the main science goal of the survey is a three-dimensional map of
the universe constructed from the positions of a million galaxies, the
SDSS will be the field guide to the heavens for decades, according to
Dr. John Peoples Jr., the project's director.

"When it is complete, the sky will be open to professional astronomers,
schoolchildren and the general public alike, day or night, rain or
shine," Peoples said.

Funding for the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) has been provided by the
Alfred E. Sloan Foundation, the participating institutions, the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, The National Science Foundation,
the U.S. Department of Energy, the Japanese Monbukagakusho, and the Max
Planck Society. The SDSS is a joint project of The University of
Chicago, Fermilab, the Institute for Advanced Study, the Japan
Participation Group, The Johns Hopkins University, the
Max-Planck-Institute for Astronomy (MPIA), the Max-Planck-Institute for
Astrophysics (MPA), New Mexico State University, Princeton University,
the United States Naval Observatory and the University of Washington.
