This month, I am moving from Fermilab to Los Alamos, and am writing to
request continuing as an external collaborator with scientists involved
in analyzing SDSS data.  There are four projects that I have gotten
greatly involved with that I would like to continue.

One is with Josh Frieman, David Weinberg, Zheng Zheng, Idit Zehavi, Erin
Sheldon, and Andreas Berlind on modelling the halo occupation
distribution (HOD) and using SDSS galaxy-galaxy and galaxy-mass
correlation function measures to constrain halo occupation model
parameters, and, vice-versa, using the correlation function measurements
and HOD to constrain
cosmology.

The second project is using the flux power spectrum of the Lyman-alpha
forest in SDSS quasar spectra to infer the shape and amplitude of the 3D
matter power spectrum, the growth of structure, and cosmological
parameters.  My work involves helping analyze the method of recovering
the 3D matter power from the flux power spectrum, testing the analysis
technique with mock data, and combining the measurements for
cosmological parameter determination in concert with CMB and other
cosmological measurements.  This collaboration is with Lam Hui, Adam
Lidz, and Scott Dodelson.

The third project involves using 3D galaxy power spectrum to study
galaxy clustering and cosmological parameters, in combination with the
other measures of large scale structure and the CMB.  This may be
combined with short-scale measurements described in the first project
above to constrain galaxy bias.  This project is in collaboration with
Scott Dodelson and Max Tegmark.

The fourth project involves measuring the growth of cosmological
structureand galaxy formation via optically-selected cluster samples
using the maxBCG technique by Jim Annis and the C4 technique by Chris
Miller and others.  I am involved in the theoretical analysis of the
measurements by Jim Annis and Chris Miller, regarding the cosmological
implications of the measurements by comparison with the expected
abundance and mass function of clusters.  We are also studying the
implications for galaxy formation theory with Risa Wechsler.

I hope to be able to complete these projects with the SDSS collaboration
 while a Director's Fellow at the particle physics and astrophysics
groups  at Los Alamos National Laboratory.

Sincerely,
Kev Abazajian

-- 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Kev Abazajian                                   ph: (505) 667-2986
T-8/T-6 Director's Fellow
   Los Alamos National Lab
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
