I am writing to request External Collaborator status in the SDSS to 
continue working on several large-scale structure projects begun while 
I was a postdoc at the University of Chicago.

I have actually been working on the SDSS since 1998 when I quantified
the effects of fiber collisions on measurements of galaxy clustering as 
David Weinberg's thesis student at Ohio State.  During the past two years 
as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Chicago, I have worked
primarily on the SDSS.  This summer I left Chicago to become a postdoc at 
NYU and I would like to continue working on SDSS projects as an external
collaborator.

My main scientific interest in the SDSS lies in using galaxy clustering
to constrain galaxy formation theories.  In particular, I am involved in
several efforts to determine the halo occupation distribution (HOD) of
galaxies (i.e., how galaxies occupy dark matter halos) as a function of
various galaxy properties, such as luminosity, color, morphology, etc.
This work is a natural extension to my theoretical thesis work, where I
investigated how the HOD can be constrained using galaxy clustering
statistics.

Specifically, I am actively involved in HOD modelling of the following
large scale structure statistics:

1) Galaxy groups and clusters in the SDSS spectroscopic sample.  I am
   leading a project to identify galaxy groups and clusters using a
   friends-of-friends algorithm.  This study is complementary to the
   efficient, but complex cluster-finding studies that operate on the
   imaging data because of its simplicity: it only uses 3D spatial 
   information to find groups.  Though the main purpose of this project is 
   to constrain the HOD, I am also investigating the general properties of 
   groups and grouped galaxies.

2) The galaxy-galaxy correlation function measured from the SDSS
   spectroscopic sample.  I am collaborating with Idit Zehavi, Josh 
   Frieman, David Weinberg, Zheng Zheng + others to extract the HOD for 
   different galaxy types using a halo model fit to the data.  The first 
   results from this collaboration appeared in Zehavi et al. 2003 and we 
   are now moving towards a more thorough publication.

3) The galaxy-mass correlation function measured from galaxy-galaxy
   lensing. I am collaborating with Erin Sheldon, Josh Frieman, Tim McKay,
   David Weinberg + others to do a similar analysis as with the
   galaxy-galaxy correlation function.

4) The anisotropy in the galaxy two-point functions caused by
   redshift-space distortions.  I am collaborating with David Weinberg,
   Jeremy Tinker, Zheng Zheng, Idit Zehavi, Josh Frieman + others to model
   the anisotropy of clustering in the HOD framework.

All of these projects involve the creation and testing of mock catalogs
that are used to test our data analysis methods.  I have helped to test
mocks that are run using the PTHalos algorithm and I have created my own
mocks by artificially populating dark matter halos in N-body simulations
with galaxies. One of the ways I have used these mocks is to investigate
the effects of fiber collisions and survey edges on clustering statistics. 
I will continue to create and test SDSS mock catalogs when I go to NYU and
I expect that they will be of use to other SDSS scientists. In addition
to making mock catalogs, I have helped to test and debug the LSS samples
and the LSS mask constructed by Michael Blanton and Max Tegmark.

I would like to continue the collaborations listed above.  I am 
essentially interested in continuing my studies of large-scale structure 
and galaxy formation by using SDSS galaxy clustering data. I plan to also 
continue developing and testing mock catalogs that will be useful for 
these purposes, and I plan to continue testing future versions of the SDSS 
LSS samples.

Sincerely,

Andreas Berlind
