I would like to apply for External Collaborator status 
in the SDSS to continue working on projects I started when 
I was a postdoc at Johns Hopkins University from September 1997 to 
December 2000. I am currently at the University of Pennsylvania. 

I have shown the following statement to Josh Frieman and Alex Szalay, 
since it is in the area of large-scale structure. 

My work in SDSS projects has been in two areas: 1. Weak gravitational
lensing, and, 2. Angular clustering of galaxies. I have developed mock
catalogs and written software for the analysis of data in these two
areas, as detailed below. 

1. Weak gravitational lensing. 
In 1997 when I joined the SDSS lensing effort, it was unclear which if 
any direction in weak lensing would yield detections and useful 
science. Beginning with the weak lensing meeting at Ann Arbor
in the fall of 1997, I developed mock catalogs of shear fields to figure
out what statistics one could measure with adequate signal to noise if
systematics were well controlled. I used redshift distributions of
source galaxies expected from the imagining survey and ran ray tracing
simulations to generate mock catalogs for different cosmological
models. These catalogs combined adequate small scale resolution with 
the wide area coverage that the SDSS provides and used the N-body 
simulations of the Virgo consortium to which I had access (they have 
since been made public). 

The SDSS dataset is quite different from the typical deep imaging
survey used for weak lensing. The simulated catalogs gave a
concrete feeling for what morphological structures one could expect
to see with adequate signal to noise given the comparatively low 
galaxy number density and shallow depth of the SDSS. Shot noise and
sample variance contributions to the errors expected on measurements
of the shear variance and power spectrum were estimated and compared
to analytical estimates based on Gaussian statistics. 

The first lensing measurement made with the SDSS was of galaxy-galaxy
lensing in 1999. I adapted the mock catalogs to be useful for estimating
noise and neighboring galaxy contributions in the galaxy-galaxy lensing
measurement. I provided the catalogs on a web site and wrote 
documentation and reading programs to make it easy to use and summarized
them in email messages on sdss-weaklens. The catalogs were not, as far
as I know, used much owing perhaps to geography: I was working 
at Hopkins while the bulk of the data analysis was done at Ann Arbor 
and Chicago. 

In parallel with the effort on shear measurements, I worked with Alex
Szalay and Andy Connolly on developing magnification as a way of 
measuring lensing. This is complementary to the shear approach and is 
affected by somewhat different systematics in the data (photometric 
calibration as opposed to psf anisotropy). While testing the angular 
clustering properties of the commissioning data, we found what appeared 
to be a lensing signal in the cross-correlation of low-z and high-z 
galaxy populations. I worked on adapting the angular correlation code 
to measure such cross-correlations and on testing it extensively. These 
tests were valuable in interpreting both the angular clustering of 
galaxies and the lensing cross-correlation. 
I also worked on the theoretical predictions and signal to noise
estimates of the lensing measurement. The cross-correlation is 
sensitive to errors in the photometric redshifts and we were able to 
estimate the level of photo-z contamination in the sample through the 
cross-correlation measurement. With Rita Kim initially, I worked on 
measuring the qso-galaxy cross-correlation as a similar measure of 
magnification bias. This work has now been merged with the efforts of 
Ryan Scranton and others. I also began work with Alex Szalay, Tim
Mckay and Narciso Benitez to detect magnification bias from the galaxy
clusters which were used to measure shear. I have repeated on two 
occasions the cross-correlation measurements and testing of photo-z's 
and color cuts through them with newer versions of photo. 

I have recently worked with Ravi Sheth and Ryan Scranton on theoretical
predictions of magnfication bias as measurable from the galaxy-galaxy
and qso-galaxy cross-correlations in the SDSS. These predictions address
a drawback in all previous theoretical work in this field: that only
models of the dark matter were used, coupled with simple linear bias
models, to predict correlations that are fundamentally different from 
biased matter correlations. We have used a halo model and the GIF 
simulations to model SDSS galaxies and found differences from all 
previous work that would be valuable in interpreting the data. Further
we estimated the signal-to-noise for SDSS data expected for both the 
galaxy-galaxy and qso-galaxy magnification bias cross-correlations. 

2. Angular clustering of galaxies. 
Since January 1998 I have worked on the measurement of clustering
parameters of the power spectrum through the angular clustering of 
galaxies. My main project has been the development of a Karhunen-Loeve
code with Alex Szalay. This code has been refined and tested over the 
past two years and has been applied to measure the sigma8 and gamma 
parameters from the commissioning data. Over the summer of 1998, I
also worked with David Weinberg, Shaun Cole at Durham, and Naoki
Yoshida at MPA, to develop mock catalogs for the imaging survey. 
Existing mock catalogs at that time were designed for the shallower 
spectroscopic survey, so there was a need to develop mocks for the 
imaging survey. My role was not in developing the catalogs (which was 
done by Cole and Yoshida), but in supplying the selection function 
and goemetry and in testing the results. 

I would like to request external collaborator status in the lensing 
and clustering projects I have contributed to. 

1. Angular cross-correlations to measure magnification bias: principally
to continue my work on low and high redshift galaxy correlations and 
qso-galaxy correlations. 
2. Angular clustering: to continue work on the measurement of clustering
and its evolution through the KL approach. 
3. Weak lensing: development of detailed mock catalogs and combination 
of shear and magnification measurements. 

Thanks,
Bhuvnesh Jain
