I have used the SDSS spectroscopic and photometric observations of AGN
to select and study in detail a rare class of AGN with double-peaked
Balmer line profiles. For my thesis I worked on double-peaked AGN
selected based on their Halpha line profiles, which restricted the
sample to redshifts smaller than z<0.33.  The characteristic
double-peaked line shapes most likely trace the rotation of the
accretion disks surrounding the supermassive black holes in AGN.  With
the help of theoretically motivated disk illumination patterns and the
resulting disk surface-emissivity, detailed studies of individual line
shapes can constrain the disk inclination and the size of the line
emitting region and distinguish between axisymmetric and
non-axisymmetric disks. The distribution of model disk parameters
inferred from the observed line profiles can be used to test AGN
unification schemes and disk stability at large distance (few thousand
to about ten thousand gravitational radii) from the central black
hole. Moreover, characterizing the general properties of the disk
emission AGN in comparison with a volume limited sample of all AGN
observed with the SDSS provides clues to theories concerning the
accretion disk emission contribution to the low-ionization lines of
all AGN.

SDSS has already produced the largest existing sample of disk-emission
candidates (Strateva, I. V., Strauss, M. A., Hao. L., et al. 2003).
The excellent photometry and asymmetry are necessary for AGN target
selection and the large area of sky which would be covered by the
survey's end guarantees the discovery of more double-peaked AGN
despite their rarity. Less than 3% of all z<0.33 AGN already surveyed
(as of June 2002) had Halpha lines indicative of disk emission, but
only about 1/4 of those (a total of 23 objects to date) were
consistent with the simplest axisymmetric disk models, which allow
unambiguous model fits. In order to enlarge the sample size, it is
essential to extend the search to larger areas as well as redshifts
(using the Hbeta and MgII lines) as SDSS data becomes available. A
large sample is also essential to constrain the multiwavelenght
properties of the disk-emitters as only 25% and 40% of the sample has
radio or X-ray counterparts, found by FIRST and ROSAT position
matches, respectively. 

I will be moving to Pennsylvania State University in January 2004 to
work as a postdoc to Dr. Niel Brandt and Dr. Donald Schneider. At Penn
State I would like to continue working on disk emission by enlarging
the SDSS double-peaked sample. In order to continue and expand this
work I will need access to the SDSS photometry and spectroscopy of all
low redshift AGN (z<1.9, where the MgII line region is still within
the observed range). 

			Iskra Strateva
