I am writing you to request external collaborator status for 
large-scale structure and galaxy-related projects involving
the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, as I will be starting my new position
at the University of Arizona next month. As you well know, I 
have been actively involved in analyzing the SDSS data for the 
past four years, during my appointments as a research associate 
at the University of Chicago and Fermilab. In collaboration with 
other members of the SDSS team, I have been leading the effort 
to quantify and investigate the spatial clustering of galaxies in 
the redshift survey by measuring the two-point correlation function  
and other related statistics in real- and redshift-space, which 
constitute one of the main SDSS Key Projects.

My work resulted in the first measurements of galaxy clustering in 
the SDSS redshift survey (Zehavi et al. 2002; with an early sample 
of 30,000 galaxies), where we presented the correlation function in 
redshift and real space and redshift distortions, and have also 
investigated the dependence of clustering on galaxy properties such 
as color, luminosity, morphology and surface brightness.

I have been performing on-going clustering studies with the growing
redshift survey. A forthcoming paper will include detailed analysis
of the spatial clustering of the current large-scale-structure sample
of roughly 170,000 galaxies. We have improved and extended our 
measurements and performed more detailed studies of the dependence on 
galaxy properties, in particular the inter-related dependence on both 
galaxy color and luminosity. In addition, we have been using the observed 
galaxy correlations to constrain theories of galaxy formation, using the 
halo occupation distribution framework.  The clustering measurements have 
already led to a new interesting result.  We detect subtle but systematic 
departures from a power law in the galaxy real-space correlation function, 
which can be naturally explained by contemporary models of galaxy clustering
(Zehavi et al. 2003).

These clustering measurements also provide a useful back-bone for 
comparisons with many other complementary estimates from the SDSS (and 
from other surveys) and for creating realistic simulations of various types. 

I have also participated in the efforts to study the angular clustering
using the photometric data and in studies of galaxy properties, resulting 
in co-authorship on several publications, where my contributions ranged 
from improving the error estimation and performing systematic tests (e.g 
in Scranton et al. 2002) to conceptual (e.g Hogg et al. 2003;  Budavari 
et al. 2003).  I was also involved in some aspects of the tiling algorithm
and the spectroscopic target selection (such as the effects of fiber 
collisions).  My close work with the data at all its evolving stages 
have also directly contributed to the validation and verification of the
reliability and usefulness of the various  large-scale structure samples.

In addition to extending the work above to future SDSS samples, I have
also began to investigate and would plan to continue working on
improved analysis of redshift distortions; additional investigations of 
the dependence of clustering on galaxy properties and their implications 
on galaxy formation models; extension of the clustering studies to the 
other SDSS large-scale samples, such as clusters of galaxies, quasars, 
and luminous red galaxies (LRG); peculiar motion studies using the sample 
of early-type galaxies with fundamental-plane distances. The LRG sample, 
in particular, is ripe for studying clustering on large scales, and its 
extension with the SDSS-2dF project will enable measuring the evolution 
of galaxy clustering.

I will appreciate the opportunity to continue to contribute to these
and other exciting projects, and look forward to continuing being an 
active member of the SDSS large-scale structure and galaxy working groups.  

With best wishes,

Idit

